Upgrade ES | Full restart & update overrode config files (#5848)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/elasticsearch.md

The following guide describes rolling restarts as the main upgrade path, which is the  default method for production environments. You can use the same workflow for full restart upgrades, except you upgrade all nodes simultaneously.

## Nodes upgrade order [upgrade-order]

When performing a rolling upgrade, upgrade one node at a time in the order of the  [node role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md) groupings below. If a node is assigned multiple node roles, it belongs in the first applicable group in the list. This ensures that:

* Built-in plugins, such as {{ilm-init}} and transforms, can continue to process data without errors.
* All nodes can join the cluster during the upgrade. Upgraded nodes can join a cluster with an earlier version master, but earlier version nodes cannot always join a cluster with an upgraded master.

> The {{es}} nodes upgrade order is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recommended upgrade order for {{es}} nodes is the following:
```

3. Upgrade the [`master` and `voting_only` master-eligible nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#master-node-role) last.

You can get the list of nodes in a specific node role using the [get node information](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-nodes-info) API. For example, use the following request for `data_frozen`:

```console
GET /_nodes/data_frozen:true/_none
```

:::{tip}
If you accidentally upgrade a node before its designated grouping order, you might encounter various errors which you can expect to continue until the rolling upgrade is completed for all nodes. 

Within `data` node sub-groupings, you might encounter various [shard allocation errors](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/cluster-allocation-api-examples.md) which you can expect to continue until more nodes within the sub-grouping are upgraded. For example, these can display as follows:

```
cannot allocate replica shard to a node with version [x.x.x] since this is older than the primary version [y.y.y]
```
:::

## Upgrade process [upgrade-process]

> To upgrade a cluster, repeating per node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To upgrade a cluster, complete these steps for every node:
```

# Upgrade {{es}} [upgrading-elasticsearch]

This runbook outlines the detailed steps for performing an upgrade of a self-managed {{es}} cluster from an old-version to a higher new-version.

Consider deploying your {{es}} cluster from within one of our [cloud deployment methods](/deploy-manage/deploy.md#choosing-your-deployment-type) to automate this process. Refer to [migrating your data](/manage-data/migrate.md) to port existing self-mananaged clusters to Elastic-managed.

Before you start the rolling upgrade procedure, [plan your upgrade](/deploy-manage/upgrade/plan-upgrade.md) and [take the upgrade preparation steps](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md). 

{{es}} does not support upgrading release candidate builds, such as 9.0.0-rc1. Use pre-releases only for testing in a temporary environment.

> {{es}} does not support version downgrades. It is important to prepare carefully before starting an upgrade. Once you have started to upgrade your cluster to the higher version you must complete the upgrade. As soon as the cluster contains nodes of the higher version it may make changes to its internal state that cannot be reverted. If you cannot complete the upgrade then you should discard the partially-upgraded cluster, deploy an empty cluster of the version before the upgrade, and [restore its contents from a snapshot](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md#create-a-snapshot-for-backup).

Author: ```suggestion
{{es}} does not support version downgrades. It is important to prepare carefully before starting an upgrade. Once you have started to upgrade your cluster to the later version you must complete the upgrade. As soon as the cluster contains nodes of the later version it can make changes to its internal state that cannot be reverted. If you cannot complete the upgrade then you should discard the partially-upgraded cluster, deploy an empty cluster of the version before the upgrade, and [restore its contents from a snapshot](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md#create-a-snapshot-for-backup).
```

Cluster upgrades can be performed as

* (Recommended) A rolling restart

    This allows you to upgrade your cluster one node at a time without interrupting service. Running multiple versions of {{es}} in the same cluster beyond the duration of an upgrade is not supported, as shards cannot be replicated from upgraded nodes to nodes running the old-version. Running more than two versions of {{es}} in the same cluster is not supported.

* A full restart

    This requires that for all nodes in your cluster, you simultaneously stop, upgrade, and then start them. The cluster will be unavailable during the upgrade process. This lack of [high availability](/deploy-manage/production-guidance/availability-and-resilience.md) introduces a window for potential data loss if upgrade is insufficiently managed.

> The following guide will be phrased towards rolling restarts as this is the expected method for production environments. Full restarts follow the same below process with the difference of modifying all nodes simultaneoulsy.

Author: ```suggestion
The following guide will be phrased toward rolling restarts as this is the expected method for production environments. Full restarts follow the same below process with the difference of modifying all nodes simultaneoulsy.
```

## Nodes upgrade order [upgrade-order]

When performing a rolling upgrade, you should proceed one node at a time based off the following [node role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md) groupings. If a node is assigned multiple node roles, organize it into its ordered grouping based off its first flagged node role in the list. This ensures that:

* Built-in plugins, such as {{ilm-init}} and transforms, can continue to process data without errors.

> * All nodes can join the cluster during the upgrade. Upgraded nodes can join a cluster with an older version master, but older version nodes cannot always join a cluster with an upgraded master.

Author: ```suggestion
* All nodes can join the cluster during the upgrade. Upgraded nodes can join a cluster with an earlier version master, but earlier version nodes cannot always join a cluster with an upgraded master.
```

3. Upgrade the [`master` and `voting_only` master-eligible nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#master-node-role) last.

You can get the list of nodes in a specific node role with a [Get Node Information API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-nodes) request, for example using `data_frozen`:

```console
GET /_nodes/data_frozen:true/_none
```

:::{tip}
If you accidentally upgrade a node before its designated grouping order, you might encounter various errors which you can expect to continue until rolling upgrade is completed for all nodes. 

Within `data` node sub-groupings, you might encounter various [shard allocation errors](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/cluster-allocation-api-examples.md) which you can expect to continue until more nodes within the sub-grouping are upgraded. These can appear like:

```
cannot allocate replica shard to a node with version [x.x.x] since this is older than the primary version [y.y.y]
```
:::

## Upgrade process [upgrade-process]

To upgrade a cluster, repeating per node:

:::::{stepper}

::::{step} (Optional) Disable shard allocation

> When you shut down a data node, the allocation process waits for `index.unassigned.node_left.delayed_timeout` (by default, one minute) before starting to replicate the shards on that node to other nodes in the cluster, which can involve a lot of I/O. Since the node is shortly going to be restarted, this I/O is unnecessary. You can avoid racing the clock by [disabling allocation](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/cluster-level-shard-allocation-routing-settings.md#cluster-routing-allocation-enable) of replicas before shutting down [data nodes](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/node-settings.md#data-node):

Author: ```suggestion
When you shut down a data node, the allocation process waits for `index.unassigned.node_left.delayed_timeout` (by default, one minute) before starting to replicate the shards on that node to other nodes in the cluster, which can involve a lot of I/O. Becausee the node is shortly going to be restarted, this I/O is unnecessary. You can avoid racing the clock by [disabling allocation](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/cluster-level-shard-allocation-routing-settings.md#cluster-routing-allocation-enable) of replicas before shutting down [data nodes](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/node-settings.md#data-node):
```

* {{es}} ships its recommended [Logging Settings](/deploy-manage/monitor/logging-configuration/elasticsearch-log4j-configuration-self-managed.md) inside `log4j2.properties` which can change across versions. Ensure any overrides are copied into the updated version's files to avoid drift. 
* Depending on how you choose to upgrade nodes, you might need to ensure no [OS-level system settings](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/important-system-configuration.md) drift. The most common are discussed under [System settings configuration methods](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/setting-system-settings.md).

::::{step} Upgrade any shutdown node's plugins
Use the `elasticsearch-plugin` script to install the upgraded version of each installed {{es}} plugin. All plugins must be upgraded when you upgrade a node.

::::{step} Start the upgraded node
Start the newly-upgraded node and confirm that it joins the cluster by checking the log file or by submitting a `_cat/nodes` request:

```console
GET _cat/nodes
```

> ::::{step} Reenable shard allocation

Author: ```suggestion
::::{step} Re-enable shard allocation
```

    5. Any other `data` nodes, such as [`data_content` tier](/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md#content-tier), which are not in a data tier.

2. Upgrade all remaining nodes that are neither master-eligible nor data nodes. The order within this grouping does not matter. This includes nodes with roles for:

    * The [`ml` machine learning role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#ml-node-role).
    * The [`ingest` role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#node-ingest-node).
    * Any [dedicated coordinating nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#coordinating-only-node-role).
    * The [`transform` role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#transform-node-role).
    * The [`remote_cluster_client` role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#remote-node).

3. Upgrade the [`master` and `voting_only` master-eligible nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#master-node-role) last.

> You can get the list of nodes in a specific node role with a [Get Node Information API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-nodes) request, for example using `data_frozen`:

Author: ```suggestion
You can get the list of nodes in a specific node role with a [Get Node Information API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-nodes-info) request, for example using `data_frozen`:
```

# Upgrade {{es}} [upgrading-elasticsearch]

> This runbook outlines the detailed steps for performing an upgrade of a self-managed {{es}} cluster from an earlier version to an upgraded later version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This runbook outlines the detailed steps for performing an upgrade of a self-managed {{es}} cluster from an earlier to a later version.
```

Reviewer 2: we don't really have the concept of runbooks in our docs - would avoid the term

Author: ACK. FWIW this is the term users request of Support which is why I thought it was a search-foo issue.

Author: ```suggestion
This guide outlines the detailed steps for performing an upgrade of a self-managed {{es}} cluster from an earlier to a later version.
```

> Consider deploying your {{es}} cluster from within one of our [cloud deployment methods](/deploy-manage/deploy.md#choosing-your-deployment-type) to automate this process. Refer to [migrating your data](/manage-data/migrate.md) to port existing self-managed clusters to Elastic-managed.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what benefit is the first sentence supporting? What are we trying to convey here?

Which process gets automated? Also, are there other [cloud deployment methods](/deploy-manage/deploy.md#choosing-your-deployment-type) outlined in that doc? That link describes installation options for all deployment types, whereas this particular upgrade page only applies to self-managed deployements.

Perhaps we can drop it and move the reference to data migration docs into a note, since it's included here as an entry point.

```suggestion
:::{note}
If you're looking to migrate existing self-managed clusters to {{ech}} (ECH) or {{ece}} (ECE), refer to [](/manage-data/migrate.md).
:::
```

Author: The sell for Elastic Cloud (ECK+Serverless as well as ECE+ECH) is that our platform automates the cluster management including upgrade flow. So users don't have to do any of the steps in this guide. It acts as a redirect for non-advanced users to move off self-managing which saves Consulting+Support hours. That said agreed it could be a `note` or just dropped; was trying to curb my Support volume, but it's not central. 

Perhaps like:

```suggestion
:::{note}
If you're looking to automate this process, consider deploying your {{es}} cluster from within one of our [cloud deployment methods](/deploy-manage/deploy.md#choosing-your-deployment-type). Refer to [migrating your data](/manage-data/migrate.md) to port existing self-managed clusters to Elastic-managed.
:::
```

Reviewer: I see, thanks for explaining that! Maybe we should mention all of that in this case? 

```suggestion
:::{tip}
The Elastic Cloud platform handles cluster management and upgrades automatically, so you don't need to follow the steps in this guide on cloud deployments such as {{ECK}}, {{ECH}}, {{ECE}}, or {{serverless-full}}.

If you want to use these automated platform features, consider deploying your {{es}} cluster using one of the available [cloud deployment methods](/deploy-manage/deploy.md#choosing-your-deployment-type). Refer to [migrating your data](/manage-data/migrate.md) to port existing self-managed clusters to Elastic-managed.
:::
```

Before you start the rolling upgrade procedure, [plan your upgrade](/deploy-manage/upgrade/plan-upgrade.md) and [take the upgrade preparation steps](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md). 

> {{es}} does not support upgrading release candidate builds, such as 9.0.0-rc1. Use pre-releases only for testing in a temporary environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrading from a release candidate build such as `9.0.0-rc1` is not supported. Use pre-releases only for testing in a temporary environment.
```

formatting for emphasis and restoring original wording to avoid clashes with the next paragraph

> {{es}} does not support version downgrades. It is important to prepare carefully before starting an upgrade. Once you have started to upgrade your cluster to the later version you must complete the upgrade. As soon as the cluster contains nodes of the later version it can make changes to its internal state that cannot be reverted. If you cannot complete the upgrade then you should discard the partially-upgraded cluster, deploy an empty cluster of the version before the upgrade, and [restore its contents from a snapshot](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md#create-a-snapshot-for-backup).

Reviewer: Rewrites for clarity:

```suggestion
{{es}} does not support downgrading to an earlier version. A mixed-version cluster is only valid during a rolling upgrade. After at least one node runs the target version, the cluster may perform updates that you can't roll back, so you must run the same upgrade through to the last node.
 
Do not start an upgrade unless you can finish the rolling upgrade for every node. 
If you have to stop mid-upgrade, you cannot return the existing cluster to the earlier version. Instead, you can rebuild an empty cluster of the earlier version and [restore from a snapshot](/deploy-manage/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md#create-a-snapshot-for-backup).
```

> Cluster upgrades can be performed as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster upgrades can be performed as:
```

> * (Recommended) A rolling restart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _(Recommended)_ **A rolling restart**
```

formatting for readability

>     This allows you to upgrade your cluster one node at a time without interrupting service. Running multiple versions of {{es}} in the same cluster beyond the duration of an upgrade is not supported, as shards cannot be replicated from upgraded nodes to nodes running the old-version. Running more than two versions of {{es}} in the same cluster is not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This option allows you to upgrade your cluster one node at a time without interrupting service. Running multiple versions of {{es}} in the same cluster beyond the duration of an upgrade is not supported, as shards cannot be replicated from upgraded nodes to nodes running the old-version. Running more than two versions of {{es}} in the same cluster is not supported.
```

> * A full restart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **A full restart**
```

I'd normally prefer to avoid unnecessary formatting, but in this instance, I feel like it's needed for emphasis.

>     This requires that for all nodes in your cluster, you simultaneously stop, upgrade, and then start them. The cluster will be unavailable during the upgrade process. This lack of [high availability](/deploy-manage/production-guidance/availability-and-resilience.md) introduces a window for potential data loss if upgrade is insufficiently managed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This option requires that you upgrade every node in a coordinated way by taking your cluster offline: all nodes are stopped, upgraded, and started together. Without [high availability](/deploy-manage/production-guidance/availability-and-resilience.md) during the outage, data loss is possible if the upgrade process is insufficiently managed.
```

Author: ```suggestion
    This option requires that you upgrade every node in a coordinated way by taking your cluster offline: all nodes are stopped, upgraded, and started together. Without [high availability](/deploy-manage/production-guidance/availability-and-resilience.md) during the downtime, data loss is possible if the upgrade process is insufficiently managed.
```

> The following guide will be phrased toward rolling restarts as this is the expected method for production environments. Full restarts follow the same below process with the difference of modifying all nodes simultaneously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following guide describes rolling restarts as the main upgrade path, which is the  default method for production environments. You can use the same workflow for full restart upgrades, except you upgrade all nodes simultaneously.
```

## Nodes upgrade order [upgrade-order]

> When performing a rolling upgrade, you should proceed one node at a time based off the following [node role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md) groupings. If a node is assigned multiple node roles, organize it into its ordered grouping based off its first flagged node role in the list. This ensures that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When performing a rolling upgrade, upgrade one node at a time in the order of the  [node role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md) groupings below. If a node is assigned multiple node roles, it belongs in the first applicable group in the list. This ensures that:
```

* Built-in plugins, such as {{ilm-init}} and transforms, can continue to process data without errors.
* All nodes can join the cluster during the upgrade. Upgraded nodes can join a cluster with an earlier version master, but earlier version nodes cannot always join a cluster with an upgraded master.

The {{es}} nodes upgrade order is:

> 1. Upgrade the [`data` nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#data-node-role). First, by lowest-to-highest temperature [data tiers](/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md), and then any remaining `data` nodes. Therefore proceed sequentially:

Reviewer: Suggestion to revert back to the original wording, as it's less confusing.
```suggestion
1. Upgrade the [`data` nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#data-node-role) first, tier-by-tier, in the following order:
```

    1. The [`data_frozen` tier](/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md#frozen-tier).
    2. The [`data_cold` tier](/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md#cold-tier).
    3. The [`data_warm` tier](/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md#warm-tier).
    4. The [`data_hot` tier](/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md#hot-tier).

>     5. Any other `data` nodes, such as [`data_content` tier](/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md#content-tier), which are not in a data tier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    5. Any other `data` nodes, such as [`data_content` tier](/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md#content-tier), which are not in a data tier.
    Complete the upgrade for all nodes in each data tier before moving to the next. This ensures {{ilm-init}} can continue to move data through the tiers during the upgrade. You can get the list of nodes in a specific tier with a `GET /_nodes` request, for example: `GET /_nodes/data_frozen:true/_none`.
    
```

Reviewer: This part was lost from the old doc

Author: It was not lost, `GET /_nodes/data_frozen:true/_none` searches below 🙂. It was definitely phrased differently (as ILM caveat was moved higher in doc & command to check nodes lower).

Reviewer: I must have missed this, apologies! 🌻

> 2. Upgrade all remaining nodes that are neither master-eligible nor data nodes. The order within this grouping does not matter. This includes nodes with roles for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Upgrade all remaining nodes that are neither master-eligible nor data nodes. The order within this grouping does not matter. This includes nodes with the following roles:
```

    * The [`ml` machine learning role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#ml-node-role).
    * The [`ingest` role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#node-ingest-node).
    * Any [dedicated coordinating nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#coordinating-only-node-role).
    * The [`transform` role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#transform-node-role).
    * The [`remote_cluster_client` role](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#remote-node).

3. Upgrade the [`master` and `voting_only` master-eligible nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#master-node-role) last.

> You can get the list of nodes in a specific node role with a [Get Node Information API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-nodes-info) request, for example using `data_frozen`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get the list of nodes in a specific node role using the [get node information](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-nodes-info)API. For example, use the following request for `data_frozen`:
```

Author: ```suggestion
You can get the list of nodes in a specific node role using the [get node information](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-nodes-info) API. For example, use the following request for `data_frozen`:
```

```console
GET /_nodes/data_frozen:true/_none
```

:::{tip}

> If you accidentally upgrade a node before its designated grouping order, you might encounter various errors which you can expect to continue until rolling upgrade is completed for all nodes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you accidentally upgrade a node before its designated grouping order, you might encounter various errors which you can expect to continue until the rolling upgrade is completed for all nodes. 
```

> Within `data` node sub-groupings, you might encounter various [shard allocation errors](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/cluster-allocation-api-examples.md) which you can expect to continue until more nodes within the sub-grouping are upgraded. These can appear like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within `data` node sub-groupings, you might encounter various [shard allocation errors](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/cluster-allocation-api-examples.md) which you can expect to continue until more nodes within the sub-grouping are upgraded. For example, these can display as follows:
```

```console
POST /_flush
```

::::

::::{step} (Optional) Temporarily stop the tasks associated with active {{ml}} jobs and {{dfeeds}}
It is possible to leave your {{ml}} jobs running during the upgrade, but it puts increased load on the cluster. When you shut down a {{ml}} node, its jobs automatically move to another node and restore the model states.

:::{note}
Any {{ml}} indices created before 8.x must be reindexed before upgrading, which you can initiate from the **Upgrade Assistant** in 8.19.
:::

* Temporarily halt the tasks associated with your {{ml}} jobs and {{dfeeds}} and prevent new jobs from opening by using the [set upgrade mode API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-ml-set-upgrade-mode):

    ```console
    POST _ml/set_upgrade_mode?enabled=true
    ```

    When you disable upgrade mode, the jobs resume using the last model state that was automatically saved. This option avoids the overhead of managing active jobs during the upgrade and is faster than explicitly stopping {{dfeeds}} and closing jobs.

> * [Stop all {{dfeeds}} and close all jobs](../../../explore-analyze/machine-learning/anomaly-detection/ml-ad-run-jobs.md#ml-ad-close-job). This option saves the model state at the time of closure. When you reopen the jobs after the upgrade, they use the exact same model. However, saving the latest model state takes longer than using upgrade mode, especially if you have a lot of jobs or jobs with large model states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Stop all {{dfeeds}} and close all jobs](/explore-analyze/machine-learning/anomaly-detection/ml-ad-run-jobs.md#ml-ad-close-job). This option saves the model state at the time of closure. When you reopen the jobs after the upgrade, they use the exact same model. However, saving the latest model state takes longer than using upgrade mode, especially if you have a lot of jobs or jobs with large model states.
```

::::

::::{step} Shut down a single node
To shut down a single node depends on what is currently used to run {{es}}. For example, if using `systemd` or SysV `init` run the commands below.

* If you are running {{es}} with `systemd`:

    ```sh
    sudo systemctl stop elasticsearch.service
    ```

* If you are running {{es}} with SysV `init`:

    ```sh
    sudo -i service elasticsearch stop
    ```

::::

> ::::{step} Upgrade the shutdown node's version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::{step} Upgrade the version of the node you shut down
```

> To upgrade using a [Debian](../../../deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/install-elasticsearch-with-debian-package.md) or [RPM](../../../deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/install-elasticsearch-with-rpm.md) package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To upgrade using a [Debian](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/install-elasticsearch-with-debian-package.md) or [RPM](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/install-elasticsearch-with-rpm.md) package:
```

    :::{important}
    If you use {{monitor-features}}, re-use the data directory when you upgrade {{es}}. Monitoring identifies unique {{es}} nodes by using the persistent UUID, which is stored in the data directory.
    :::

4. Set `path.logs` in `config/elasticsearch.yml` to point to the location where you want to store your logs. If you do not specify this setting, logs are stored in the directory you extracted the archive to.

:::{tip}
When you extract the zip or tarball packages, the `elasticsearch-{{bare_version}}` directory contains the {{es}} `config`, `data`, and `logs` directories.

We recommend moving these directories out of the {{es}} directory so that there is no chance of deleting them when you upgrade {{es}}. To specify the new locations, use the `ES_PATH_CONF` environment variable and the `path.data` and `path.logs` settings. For more information, refer to [Important {{es}} configuration](../../../deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/important-settings-configuration.md).

The Debian and RPM packages place these directories in the appropriate place for each operating system. In production, we recommend using the deb or rpm package.
:::

::::

> ::::{step} Merge the shutdown node's config overrides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::{step} Merge the config overrides of the shut down node
```

> Ensure to align any [{{es}} configuration changes](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/configure-elasticsearch.md). The most common settings to review include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply any required [{{es}} configuration changes](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/configure-elasticsearch.md) to align your configuration with the version you are upgrading to. The most common settings to review include:
```

> * Leave `cluster.initial_master_nodes` unset inside your `elasticsearch.yml` when performing a rolling upgrade. Each upgraded node is joining an existing cluster so there is no need for [cluster bootstrapping](../../../deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/discovery-cluster-formation/modules-discovery-bootstrap-cluster.md). You must configure [either `discovery.seed_hosts` or `discovery.seed_providers`](../../../deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/important-settings-configuration.md#discovery-settings) on every node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Leave `cluster.initial_master_nodes` unset inside your `elasticsearch.yml` when performing a rolling upgrade. Each upgraded node is joining an existing cluster so there is no need for [cluster bootstrapping](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/discovery-cluster-formation/modules-discovery-bootstrap-cluster.md). You must configure [either `discovery.seed_hosts` or `discovery.seed_providers`](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/important-settings-configuration.md#discovery-settings) on every node.
```

> * {{es}} ships its recommended [JVM Settings](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/jvm-settings.md) inside `jvm.options` which can change across versions. Ensure any overrides are copied into the updated version's `jvm.options.d` files to avoid drift.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {{es}} ships its recommended [JVM settings](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/jvm-settings.md) inside `jvm.options` which can change across versions. Ensure any overrides are copied into the updated version's `jvm.options.d` files to avoid drift.
```

> * {{es}} ships its recommended [Logging Settings](/deploy-manage/monitor/logging-configuration/elasticsearch-log4j-configuration-self-managed.md) inside `log4j2.properties` which can change across versions. Ensure any overrides are copied into the updated version's files to avoid drift. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {{es}} ships its recommended [logging settings](/deploy-manage/monitor/logging-configuration/elasticsearch-log4j-configuration-self-managed.md) inside `log4j2.properties` which can change across versions. Ensure any overrides are copied into the updated version's files to avoid drift. 
```

> * Depending on how you choose to upgrade nodes, you might need to ensure no [OS-level system settings](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/important-system-configuration.md) drift. The most common are discussed under [System settings configuration methods](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/setting-system-settings.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Avoid drift in [OS-level system settings](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/important-system-configuration.md) between nodes. That is most likely when you add or rebuild a node and the OS is not a copy of the previous one. For common settings and how to apply them, refer to [System settings configuration methods](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/setting-system-settings.md).
```

Reviewer: Not sure if this is what you meant, but feel free to edit this

::::

> ::::{step} Upgrade any shutdown node's plugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::{step} Upgrade any plugins
```

Author: Plugins apply per node as a file-based appendage, so it should still disclaim to not mass update all plugins on all nodes everywhere but to also rolling upgrade the plugins as you rolling upgrade their corresponding nodes. Unsure on the wording of that though, sorry for the bad attempt 🙃 
```suggestion
::::{step} Upgrade any plugins on the shut down node
```

Reviewer: Ah, makes sense. The last suggestion looks good

Use the `elasticsearch-plugin` script to install the upgraded version of each installed {{es}} plugin. All plugins must be upgraded when you upgrade a node.

::::

::::{step} Start the upgraded node
Start the newly-upgraded node and confirm that it joins the cluster by checking the log file or by submitting a `_cat/nodes` request:

```console
GET _cat/nodes
```

::::

::::{step} Re-enable shard allocation
For data nodes, once the node has joined the cluster, remove the `cluster.routing.allocation.enable` setting to enable shard allocation and start using the node:

```console
PUT _cluster/settings
{
  "persistent": {
    "cluster.routing.allocation.enable": null
  }
}
```

::::

::::{step} Wait for the node to recover

Before upgrading the next node, wait for the cluster to finish shard allocations by reporting `status: green`. You can check progress by submitting a [Cluster health status API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cluster-health):

```console
GET _cluster/health
```

> Shards that were not flushed might take longer to recover. You can monitor the recovery status of individual shards by submitting a [CAT recovery API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-recovery):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shards that were not flushed might take longer to recover. You can monitor the recovery status of individual shards using the [CAT recovery](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-recovery) API:
```

```console
GET _cat/recovery?v=true&expand_wildcards=all&active_only=true
```

If you stopped indexing, it is safe to resume indexing as soon as recovery completes.

::::

::::{step} Restart machine learning jobs
If you temporarily halted the tasks associated with your {{ml}} jobs, use the set upgrade mode API to return them to active states:

```console
POST _ml/set_upgrade_mode?enabled=false
```

If you closed all {{ml}} jobs before the upgrade, open the jobs and start the datafeeds from {{kib}} or with the [open jobs](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-ml-open-job) and [start datafeed](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-ml-start-datafeed) APIs.

:::::

If you plan to upgrade nodes in quick succession, you might choose to leave indexing stopped and machine learning jobs and feeds paused throughout the entire upgrade process. You will still want to re-enable shard allocation after each node's restart.

> To monitor which nodes have been upgraded, use the [CAT nodes API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-nodes):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To monitor which nodes have been upgraded, use the [CAT nodes](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-nodes) API:
```

```console
GET _cat/nodes?v=true&h=name,ip,version,uptime
```

> ## Common issues [upgrade-issues]

Reviewer: I feel like `considerations` is a less "panicky" (as in less potential to cause panic when reading this) way of describing some of these behaviours.

```suggestion
## Rolling upgrades considerations [upgrade-issues]
```

Author: I like that. FWIW I was considering expanding this in future to fill in all the common upgrade errors Support helps users with. It just felt like way too much for this PR. But will modify (or not) in future.

Reviewer: We could add a new page dedicated to commonly encountered upgrade issues in the [Troubleshooting](https://www.elastic.co/docs/troubleshoot) section and link it on this page, wdyt?
